Dev/roddy docs whitebox (#60)
XAITK/xaitk-saliency: docs/introduction.rst

----------------------------------------------

> Figure 4 shows a deep learning pipeline for recognizing objects in

Author: Yes, good point... done.

> images; pixels in the image (in green) are processed by the pipeline (in yellow)

Reviewer: do we care about what the other colors (turquoise & red) represent in the diagram?

Author: No; I replaced the underlying image with an uncolored version for clarity.

   output for the related images, we can deduce certain aspects of the
   model's behavior.

.. note:: These descriptions apply only to *using the model after it has been created*; nothing is implied about how the model is constructed.

> .. note:: This distinction applies to both the *concept* and *implementation*. A model could support white box reasoning but lack the APIs to access the internal state; conversely, it might provide complete API access yet provide no guidance on how that state influences the output. **API access to the model does not automatically imply white box XAI.**

Reviewer 2: Minor and maybe subjective: the use of "XAI" and the end here didn't make sense / flow for me. Maybe instead the following?
```suggestion
.. note:: This distinction applies to both the *concept* and *implementation*. A model could support white box reasoning but lack the APIs to access the internal state; conversely, it might provide complete API access yet provide no guidance on how that state influences the output. **API access to the model does not automatically imply white box explainability.**
```

Reviewer 3: I think what we are trying to capture is the difference between "white box" and "black box" testing (but essentially from a ML versus software perspective)? e.g. see comparison tables [here](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/differences-between-black-box-testing-vs-white-box-testing/) and [here](https://www.guru99.com/back-box-vs-white-box-testing.html)

> .. note:: This distinction applies to both the *concept* and *implementation*. A model could support white box reasoning but lack the APIs to access the internal state; conversely, it might provide complete API access yet provide no guidance on how that state influences the output. **API access to the model does not automatically imply white box XAI.**

Reviewer 2: Can notes take multi-line strings? I might suggest a once-sentence-per-line if possible for future diff sanity.

Author: fill-paragraph-or-region seems to indent correctly for multi-line notes; applied to both.

Let's take a look at the pros and cons of these two approaches.

White Box Methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> A **white box** model exposes some (or all) of the internal state of
> the model; the explanation draws a connection between this exposed
> state and the model output. Some models are intrinsically introspective to the point where they are not so much "white box" as transparent:

Reviewer 2: I think white-box is more descriptive of the explanation method than model transparency: a white-box method requires/implies some model transparency, but some model transparency does not imply it is sufficient for a white-box method.
```suggestion
A **white box** explanation method makes use of a model's exposed internal state or representation;
the explanation draws a connection between this exposed
state and the model output. Some models are intrinsically introspective to the point where they are not so much "white box" as transparent:
```

> * In `linear regression

Reviewer: insert a comma after "regression"

Author: done

  <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_regression>`_ the influence of
  the observations on the solution are an immediate consequence of the
  method.

> 

Reviewer: s/b the "influence of the observations on the solution **is** an immediate consequence" (unless you mean the observations themselves are immediate *consequences*)

Author: done

* In a `decision tree <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_tree>`_,
  the output is directly computed by making the comparisons and
  branches encoded in the model.

An example of a white box explanation method for CNNs is Grad-CAM (`paper <https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.02391>`_, `code <https://github.com/ramprs/grad-cam/>`_), which exposes some (but not all) of the CNN layers to the explanation generation algorithm.

.. figure:: figures/intro-grad-cam-annotated.png

   Figure 5: Grad-CAM architecture. Functional regions annotated to align with Figure 4: input in green, CNN architecture in yellow, output in orange. The explanation functionality is in blue; the APIs granting access to the model are in red. Figure from the `Grad-CAM code repo. <https://github.com/ramprs/grad-cam/>`_

> In Grad-CAM, first the model computes its output per the typical processing flow: input (green), through the CNN (yellow), to the output (orange.) The explanation is created via an additional processing step which uses the output and feature maps from within the CNN (red circles) to measure and visualize the activation of those regions associated with the output (blue).

Reviewer: processing step *that* uses the output

Reviewer: "to measure and visualize the activation of those regions associated with the output (_blue_)" 
> I thought the output was orange?

Two aspects typical of white box methods are demonstrated here:

* **The explanation could not have been created from the output alone**. In order to operate, the explanation algorithm (blue) required access to both the output *and* the CNN internals.
* **The algorithm implementation is tightly coupled to the CNN architecture exposed by the API**. Although the *method* may be general, any particular *implementation* will require the CNN architecture to conform to the specifics of the API.

In general, pros and cons of white box approaches are:

> Pros

Reviewer 3: Another pro is generally only requires a single forward/backward pass through the model, so it is more computationally efficient compared to black-box explanation methods.

""""

> * A white box model can choose to **leverage its tight coupling to the model** to maximize the information available, at the sacrifice of generalization to other models.

Reviewer 3: model -> explanation?

> * A white box model **accesses the actual computation which generated the output**. The explanation is derived directly from what the model computed about the input, in contrast to black box models which can only indirectly compare the output to output from slightly different inputs.

Reviewer 3: model -> explanation?
